
1

Automatic Zoom
International Academic Journal of Economics and Finance | Volume 3, Issue 6, pp. 333-344
333 | P a g e
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND PERFORMANCE
OF STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES IN GHANA
Rev. Dr. Maxwell Dela Yao Gakpo.
Trimonde Ghana Limited, Ghana
Ing. Dr. Kenneth Kwaku Ashigbey.
Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications, Ghana
Mercy Kwakye.
Department of Accounting & Finance, Pentecost University, Ghana
©2020
International Academic Journal of Economics and Finance (IAJEF) | ISSN 2518-2366
Received: 7th February 2021
Published: 14th February 2021
Full Length Research
Available Online at: http://iajournals.org/articles/iajef_v3_i6_333_344.pdf
Citation: Gakpo, M. D. Y., Ashigbey, K. K., Kwakye, M. (2021). Corporate governance and
performance of state-owned enterprises in Ghana. International Academic Journal of
Economics and Finance, 3(6), 333-344
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3790914
International Academic Journal of Economics and Finance | Volume 3, Issue 6, pp. 333-344
334 | P a g e
ABSTRACT
Corporate Governance and its relations
with firm performance is the subject of a lot
of academic interest. Corporate governance
studies in Africa still lags and relatively less
researched in the area of State operations.
Therefore, this study was conducted to
establish whether or not, adherence to good
corporate governance practices influences
the financial performance of State-Owned
Enterprises in Ghana. This quantitative
inquiry is anchored on the positivist
method. Return on Capital Employed
(ROCE) was used as proxy for the financial
performance of these State-Owned
Enterprises. The presence of an audit
committee, gender diversity of boards,
board size and the frequency of board
meetings were applied as characteristics of
corporate governance. Twenty-two (22)
SOEs were purposively sampled with data
spanning from 2012 to 2016. The study
found out that though there were some
positive and negative relations between the
four independent variables and the
accounting performance measures.
However, most of the relationships were
not statistically significant. Corporate
governance did not improve firm
performance directly but it required the
interaction with other factors to achieve the
changes required. The study recommends
that other factors of corporate governance
should be explored as well as the
interrelationships between them in future
studies. Most of the objects of these State -
Owned Enterprises in Ghana are not
primarily profits oriented, so other
dependent variables like their impact on
citizens and delivery of key performance
indicators should also be considered in
future research as performance measures.
Keywords: corporate governance, state-
owned enterprise, return on capital
employed, financial performance.
INTRODUCTION
Corporate governance (CG) on the global business agenda is a prerequisite for supporting and
sustaining economic, business growth and community development (Ndemezo & Kayitana,
2018). The agents of the owners; the managers, are appointed to direct and manage the varying
interest and the overall wellbeing of the firm and the protection of stakeholders’ interest
(Dzingai & Fakoya, 2017). Several factors are involved in the determination of an agency
structure and composition for an organization including financial decision-making, board size,
organization of labour, investors’ activism and owner’s identity (Jiang & Kim, 2015). Firm
financial performance is indicative of appropriate corporate governance mechanisms within
organizations. For state-owned enterprises (SOE) to have effective corporate governance
systems and mechanism, it’s imperative for government to set clear goals, be transparent and
protect state-owned enterprises from political interference (Amoako & Goh, 2015). Since the
introduction of the guidelines by the State Enterprises Commission (SEC) incorporated under
the Legislative Instrument (L.I. 47) in 1965, based on the study’s observations, there have not
been any known research that has intended to explore and find answers to the impact of these
recommended corporate governance mechanisms on the financial performance and outcomes
of firms either by regulators, government or academia. Research into the effect of corporate
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3790914
