
1

Automatic Zoom
T THABANE & E SNYMAN VAN DEVENTER PER / PELJ 2018 (21) 1
Abstract
Globally, states use state-owned companies (SOCs) or public corporations
to provide public goods, limit private and foreign control of the domestic
economy, generate public funds for the fiscus, increase service delivery and
encourage economic development and industrialisation. Particularly given
its unique socio-political and economic dynamics, a country such as South
Africa clearly needs this type of strategic enterprise. Yet, that does not mean
that everything at our SOCs is as it should be. The beleaguered South
African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) has recently seen the resignation
of board members, shareholder interference in its operational affairs, and a
high turnover of chief accounting officers and other executive management
members. Due to non-performance, it has also received several cash
injections from its shareholder to enable it to continue to deliver its services.
In addition, the shareholder minister took it upon herself to amend the
SABC's memorandum of incorporation, conferring upon herself the authority
to appoint, suspend or even dismiss key executive members. South African
Airways (SAA), in turn, has had seven CEOs in less than four years, has
had to be bailed out at a cost of R550 million, and has in addition been
granted a R5 billion guarantee by the shareholder for a restructuring
exercise. Other SOCs such as Eskom, the Post Office and Telkom have
also experienced high board and executive management turnover,
perennial underperformance necessitating regular bailouts, and challenges
regarding the division of power between their boards and the various
shareholder ministers. Another issue that seems to plague South Africa's
SOCs is the appointment of board members and executive officials with
questionable qualifications. By critically examining the corporate
governance challenges besetting the SABC, SAA and Eskom in particular,
this article seeks to explore the root causes of the corporate governance
deficiencies of SOCs, and how their corporate governance can be
enhanced. It is concluded that the challenges faced by the country's SOCs
are twofold: firstly, the SOCs boards' lack of appreciation of the cardinal
corporate governance rules, and secondly, the role of government as a
single or dominant shareholder, which results in substantial political
interference in the running of the SOCs. This dual problem requires a dual
solution. To arrest the problem of poor corporate governance in SOCs,
government as the shareholder should firstly appoint fit and proper directors,
having followed a sound due-diligence process. Once it has established
such properly skilled and competent boards, however, government should
adopt an arm's-length approach to the affairs of the SOCs as a way of
insulating these corporations from political interference.
Keywords
State-owned companies; corporate governance; deficiencies; South
Africa; SAA; SABC; Eskom
................................................................
Pathological Corporate Governance Deficiencies
in South Africa's State-Owned Companies:
A Critical Reflection
T Thabane and E Snyman-Van Deventer*
Pioneer in peer-reviewed,
open access online law publications
Authors
Tebello Thabane
Elizabeth Snyman van Deventer
Affiliation
University of Cape Town
University of the Free State
South Africa
Email
Tebello.thabane@uct.ac.za
snymane@ufs.ac.za
Date of submission
2 May 2017
Date published
8 January 2018
Editor Prof O Fuo
How to cite this article
Thabane T and Snyman-Van
Deventer E "Pathological
Corporate Governance
Deficiencies in South Africa's
State-Owned Companies: A Critical
Reflection" PER / PELJ 2018(21) -
DOI
http://dx.doi.org/10.17159/1727-
3781/2018/v21i0a2345
Copyright
DOI
http://dx.doi.org/10.17159/1727-
3781/2018/v21i0a2345
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3122230
T THABANE & E SNYMAN VAN DEVENTER PER / PELJ 2018 (21) 2
1 Introduction
In 2014, the office of the South African Public Protector in a published report
found developments at the South African Broadcasting Corporation
(SABC), a state-owned company, to be "symptomatic of pathological
corporate governance deficiencies".1 In addition, the Public Protector found
that the SABC board had failed "to provide strategic oversight to the national
broadcaster as provided for in the SABC Board Charter and King III
Report".2
Of course, failure of corporate governance is in no way unique to the SABC.
Within the South African context, other examples where failed corporate
governance has led to reduced shareholder value or even the total collapse
of companies include Masterbond, CNA, Unifer, Tollgate and Leisurenet.3
This contribution, however, will focus specifically on corporate governance
at the country's state-owned companies (SOCs), for a few reasons. Firstly,
SOCs play a significant part in the growth, development and stability of the
South African economy, with key SOCs being the Development Bank of
Southern Africa, South African Airways (SAA), Eskom, Telkom and
Transnet.4 Secondly, good corporate governance in SOCs also serves to
incentivise other companies to embrace corporate governance principles,
which may ultimately see an improvement in the country's global market
power and ability to attract foreign investment.5 Thirdly, SOCs generally
provide basic services to society, which means that in most instances the
* Tebello Thabane. BA Law LLB (Lesotho) LLM (Pretoria) LLM (Free State). Lecturer
in Commercial Law, University of Cape Town, PhD Candidate (UCT), South Africa.
Email: tebello.thabane@uct.ac.za.
** Elizabeth Snyman-Van Deventer. BIuris LLB LLM LLM LLD (Free State). Professor
in Mercantile Law, University of the Free State, South Africa. Email:
snymane@ufs.ac.za.
1 Office of the Public Protector 2014 http://www.pprotect.org/sites/default/files/
Legislation_report/SABC%20FINAL%20REPORT%2017%20FEBRUARY%202014
.pdf 20.
2 Office of the Public Protector 2014 http://www.pprotect.org/sites/default/files/
Legislation_report/SABC%20FINAL%20REPORT%2017%20FEBRUARY%202014
.pdf 21.
3 Ahunwan Globalisation and Corporate Governance 13; Nancy et al Enron and other
Corporate Fiascos.
4 Others include Denel, Airports Company South Africa, the Public Investment
Corporation, the Government Employees Medical Scheme, the Government
Employees Pension Fund and the SA Post Office.
5 Makuta 2009 Malawi LJ 55, 60.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3122230
