
1

Automatic Zoom
1
This paper should be cited as follows:
Nakpodia, F., Adegbite, E. Amaeshi, K. and Owolabi, A. (2018), "Neither principles nor
rules: Making corporate governance work in Sub-Saharan Africa", Journal of Business Ethics,
Vol.151 (2), pp. 391-408.
Neither Principles nor Rules: Making Corporate Governance work in Sub-Saharan
Africa1
Abstract
Corporate governance is often split between rule-based and principle-based approaches to
regulation in different institutional contexts. This split is often informed by the types of
institutional configurations, their strengths, and the complementarities within them. This
approach to corporate governance regulation is mostly discussed in the context of developed
economies and their regulatory demands. However, in developing and weak market
economies, such as in Sub-Saharan Africa, there is no such explicit split and the debates on
such contexts in the comparative corporate governance literature has been meagre.
Nonetheless, there are sparks of good corporate governance practices in the region. Drawing
from institutional theory and a case study of Nigeria –Africa’s largest economy– we explore
the appropriateness or suitability of corporate governance regulatory frameworks in Sub-
Saharan Africa. Our findings suggest that Nigeria needs an integrated system that combines
elements of both rule-based and principle-based regulation, supported by a multi-stakeholder
co-regulation strategy. This paper departs from the mainstream rule-based and principle-
1 This article majorly constitutes a part in Nakpodia, F. (2016). An Assessment of Institutional Influences on
Corporate Governance in Nigeria: A Multi-Stakeholder Perspective. Unpublished Doctoral thesis, Newcastle
Business school, Northumbria University, UK
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3512771
2
based categorisations by forging ahead new perspectives on corporate governance regulation,
especially in weak market economies.
Keywords: Corporate governance, Sub-Saharan Africa (Nigeria), principles-based, rule-
based, co-regulation, institutional theory; culture.
Introduction
The suitability of corporate governance systems in different countries is mainly linked to the
robustness of their underlying regulatory mechanisms (Shrives & Brennan, 2015). Corporate
governance systems are also often assessed on either principle-based or rule-based
perspectives (Sama & Shoaf, 2005; Arjoon, 2006; Black, 2008). Principle-based corporate
governance codes are voluntary/non-binding set of recommendations, standards, and best
practices, issued by a collective body, in relation to the governance of corporations within a
country (Chizema, 2008; Osemeke & Adegbite, 2016). Rule-based systems, however, create
more avenues for government to intervene in corporate governance by coming up with
stricter laws which must be adhered to (Adegbite, Shrives, & Nichol, 2011). The literature on
principle-based and rule-based regulations have mainly focused on understanding which of
the regulatory approaches is better in different conditions (see Arjoon, 2006; Benston,
Bromwich, & Wagenhofer, 2006). For instance, while Arjoon (2006) highlights the
drawbacks of an excessive reliance on rule-based regulatory approach, Black (2008)
explained that the global economic crisis of 2008 has exposed the failings of a principle-
based regulatory approach.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3512771
