
3

Automatic Zoom
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1845429
1
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Research into dividend policy has shown not only that a general theory of dividend policy
remains elusive, but also that corporate dividend practice varies over time, among firms
and across countries (Amidu, 2007).
Corporate governance has dominated policy agenda in developed market economies for
more than a decade and it is gradually warming its way to the top of the policy agenda on
the African continent (Abor, 2007). Developing countries are now increasingly
embracing the concept of good corporate governance because of its ability to impact
positively on sustainable growth (Abor, 2007). At the Annual General Meeting of Cocoa
Processing Company (a listed company on the GSE) in 2008, shareholders of the
company raised concerns about the payment of low dividend accusing the Directors of
squandering their investments.
Although some empirical studies on Corporate Governance in Ghana have been carried
out on firms listed on Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE) (Abor, 2007; Isshaq, 2009), no
empirical study exists to determine the linkage between corporate governance and
dividend policy of firms in Ghana. There is also very scanty literature on the topic. A
study of the relationship between corporate governance and the dividend policy of
Ghanaian firms is therefore crucial and will provide the initial argument for other
researchers to build on. Within the Sub-Saharan Africa, the study is among the few work
on corporate governance especially relating it to dividend policy and it offers evidence on
the impact of corporate governance on dividend policy. The paper provides useful
information that is of great value to policy makers, academics and other stakeholders.
The purpose of this paper was to examine the effect of corporate governance on dividend
policy in Ghana, after controlling the influence of other variables likely to impact on
dividend policy. The specific objectives for the study are as follows:
1. To establish the relationship between corporate governance and dividend policy
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1845429
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1845429
3
of past dividends. Amidu and Abor (2006) reported similar findings in Ghana. They
found that the most important factor influencing dividend payout by firms listed on the
Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE) is their level of earnings or profitability.
2.2 Theories on Why Firms Pay Dividends
2.2.1 Bird-in-the-hand theory
The "Bird in Hand" theory of Gordon (1962) argues that outside shareholders prefer a
higher dividend policy. They prefer a dividend today to a highly uncertain capital gain
from a questionable future investment. A number of studies demonstrate that this model
fails if it is posited in a complete and perfect market with investors who behave according
to notions of rational behavior (Miller and Modigliani, 1961; Bhattacharya, 1979)
2.2.2 Signaling Theory
According to the information content of dividends or signaling theory, firms, despite the
distortion of investment decisions to capital gains, may pay dividends to signal their
future prospects (Amidu, 2007). The intuition underlying this argument is based on the
information asymmetry between managers (insiders) and outside investors, where
managers have private information about the current and future fortunes of the firm that
is not available to outsiders.
2.2.3 Agency theory
Even if a firm does not have free cash flow, dividend payments can still be useful for the
shareholders in order to control the overinvestment problem. Easterbrook (1984) argues
that dividends reduce the overinvestment problem because the payment of dividends
increases the frequency with which firms have to go to equity markets in order to raise
additional capital. In the process of attracting new equity, firms subject themselves to the
monitoring and disciplining of these markets. This lowers agency cost.
2.3 Corporate Governance
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1845429
4
The existence of divergent and sometimes conflicting objectives among corporate
managers and shareholders has given rise to the design of many concepts and
mechanisms to ensure that the cost associated with such divergent interest is minimal.
One of the arrangements proposed to deal with this is corporate governance (Kyereboah-
Coleman, 2007). Corporate governance is primarily concerned with finding a solution to
the principal-agent problem (Ehikioya, 2009). Advocates of corporate governance have
identified internal and external governance mechanisms that reduce the agency problem
(Agarwal and Knoeber, 1996). The corporate governance structure such as ownership
structure, Board composition, Board size, and CEO duality have a great influence on
performance and corporate decisions.
The proxies for corporate governance in this study are Board size, Board composition and
CEO duality (whether the CEO is also the Board Chairman).
2.3.1 Size of the Board
Jensen (1993) and Lipton and Lorsch (1992) have argued that large Boards are less
effective and are easier for a CEO to control. Raheja (2005) showed that larger Boards
have higher coordination costs. Also smaller Boards reduce the possibility of free riding
by individual directors and thus increase their decision-making processes. Studies by
Wen et al. (2002) and Abor (2007) found evidence in support of a positive relationship
between Board size and leverage. They argued that large Boards with superior
monitoring ability pursue higher leverage to raise the value of the firm.
2.3.2 Board Independence
John and Senbet (1998) show that the independence of a corporate Board is measured by
the number of outside or non-executive directors. The larger the proportion of non-
executive directors, the more independent the Board. A general consensus is that non-
executive directors are deemed to act as “professional referees” to ensure shareholder
value maximization (Fama, 1980). Jiraporn et al. (2008) found a positive and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1845429
