
1

Automatic Zoom
1
Agency costs, Ownership Structure and Corporate
Governance Mechanisms in Ghana
Andrews Owusua
School of Economics, Finance and Accounting
Faculty of Business and Law
Coventry University
Coventry, CV1 5FB
a.owusu@coventry.ac.uk
Charlie Weirb
Aberdeen Business School
Robert Gordon University
Aberdeen
AB10 7QE
Email: c.weir@rgu.ac.uk
aAndrews Owusu is a Senior Lecturer in Accounting at School of Economics, Finance and
Accounting, Coventry University. He obtained his PhD from the Robert Gordon University. His
research interests are in the areas of performance consequences of corporate governance
changes, auditing and earnings management. He has published in International Journals such as
Journal of Applied Accounting Research, Journal of Developing Areas, Journal of Modern
Accounting and Auditing.
bCharlie Weir is a Professor in Economics at Aberdeen Business School, Robert Gordon
University. He obtained his PhD from the University of Aberdeen. His research interests are in
the areas of corporate governance and the market for corporate control. He has published in
many journals including Corporate Governance: An international Review, Journal of Business
Finance and Accounting, European Financial Management, the European Journal of Finance
and Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank the participants of IMRA-Kean University
Conference, New Jersey, USA, 2014 for their helpful comments. We are also grateful to two
anonymous referees for their helpful comments.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4180007
2
Abstract
This paper analyses the relationship between agency costs, ownership structure and corporate
governance mechanisms in Ghana for the study period 2000-2009. Our results show that smaller
board size and the presence of audit and remuneration committees decrease agency costs. We
also find that higher managerial and institutional ownership reduces agency costs. However,
duality and the proportion of non-executive directors on the board have no effect on agency
costs, suggesting that not all board structure governance mechanisms are effective in mitigating
agency costs. Interestingly, the non-board structure code recommendations such as improved
shareholder voting rights, the adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards and
auditor quality have also reduced agency costs. Overall, we find that the introduction of the
Ghanaian Code played significant role in reducing agency costs.
Keywords: Agency costs, corporate governance, ownership structure, Ghana
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4180007
